MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 25th March, 2021/Chaitra 4, 1943 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
25th March, 2021, and is hereby published for general information:—

THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY (AMENDMENT)
ACT, 2021
N O . 8 OF 2021
[25th March, 2021.]

An Act further to amend the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Termination of Pregnancy (Amendment)
Act, 2021.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint

2. In the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 2,—


(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(aa) "Medical Board" means the Medical Board constituted under
sub-section (2C) of section 3 of the Act;';
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(e) "termination of pregnancy" means a procedure to terminate a
pregnancy by using medical or surgical methods.'.

In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a registered medical practitioner,—

(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twenty weeks, if
such medical practitioner is, or

(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks but does
not exceed twenty-four weeks in case of such category of woman as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act, if not less than two registered medical practitioners are,

of the opinion, formed in good faith, that—

(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of
the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or mental health; or

(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from any serious physical or mental abnormality.

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of clause (a), where any pregnancy
occurs as a result of failure of any device or method used by any woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting the number of children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by such pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.

Explanation 2.—For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b), where any
pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been caused by rape, the
anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave
injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.

(2A) The norms for the registered medical practitioner whose opinion is
required for termination of pregnancy at different gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

(2B) The provisions of sub-section (2) relating to the length of the
pregnancy shall not apply to the termination of pregnancy by the medical
practitioner where such termination is necessitated by the diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical Board.

(2C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case may be,
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called a Medical Board for the purposes of this Act to exercise such powers and functions as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

(2D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following, namely:—
(a) a Gynaecologist;
(b) a Paediatrician;
(c) a Radiologist or Sonologist; and
(d) such other number of members as may be notified in the Official
Gazette by the State Government or Union territory, as the case may be.".

4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"5A. (1) No registered medical practitioner shall reveal the name and other
particulars of a woman whose pregnancy has been terminated under this Act except to a person authorised by any law for the time being in force.

(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.".

5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

"(aa) the category of woman under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 3;

(ab) the norms for the registered medical practitioner whose opinion is required for termination of pregnancy at different gestational age under
sub-section (2A) of section 3;

(ac) the powers and functions of the Medical Board under
sub-section (2C) of section 3.".