The Medical Termination Of Pregnancy Act, 1971
(Act No. 34 of 1971)
An Act to provide for the termination of certain pregnancies by registered
medical practitioners and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:
1. Short title, extent and commencement.(1) This Act may be called the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
1971.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint.
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,(a) "guardian" means a person having the care of the person of a minor
or a lunatic;
(b) "lunatic" has the meaning assigned to it in Sec.3 of the Indian Lunacy
Act, 1912 (4 of 1912) ;
(c) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian
Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875), is to be deemed not to have attained his
majority,
(d) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who
possesses any recognized medical qualification as defined in Cl.(h) of
Sec. 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), whose
name has been entered in a State Medical Register and who has such
experience or training in gynecology and obstetrics as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. When Pregnancies may be terminated
practitioners.-

by

registered

medical

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), a registered medical practitioner shall not be guilty of any
offence under that Code or under any other law for the time being in
force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may be
terminated by a registered medical practitioner,(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twelve
weeks if such medical practitioner is,
or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twelve weeks but
does not exceed twenty weeks, if not less than two registered
medical practitioners are.
Of opinion, formed in good faith, that,(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the
pregnant woman or of grave injury physical or mental health ; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would
suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously
handicapped.
Explanation 1.-Where any, pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have
been caused by rape, the anguish caused by such pregnancy shall be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.-Where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device
or method used by any married woman or her husband for the purpose of
limiting the number of children, the anguish caused by such unwanted pregnancy
may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant
woman.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of pregnancy would involve such
risk of injury to the health as is mentioned in sub-section (2), account may be
taken of the pregnant woman's actual or reasonable foreseeable environment.
(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen
years, or, who, having attained the age of eighteen years, is a lunatic, shall be
terminated except with the consent in writing of her guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in C1.(a), no pregnancy shall be terminated
except with the consent of the pregnant woman.
4. Place where pregnancy may be terminated.-No termination of pregnancy
shall be made in accordance with this Act at any place other than,(a) a hospital established or maintained by Government, or
(b) a place for the time being approved for the purpose of this Act by
Government.

5. Sections 3 and 4 when not to apply.(1) The provisions of Sec.4 and so much of the provisions of sub-section
(2 of Sec. 3 as relate to the length of the pregnancy and the opinion of
not less than two registered medical practioner, shall not apply to the
termination of a pregnancy by the registered medical practitioner in case
where he is of opinion, formed in good faith, that the termination of such
pregnancy is immediately necessary to save the life of the pregnant
woman.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), the termination of a pregnancy by a person who is not a registered
medical practitioner shall be an offence punishable under that Code, and
that Code shall, to this extent, stand modified.
6. Power to make rules.-4
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the provisions of
this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or
any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the experience or training, or both, which a registered medical
practitioner shall have if he intends
to terminate any pregnancy under this Act ; and
(b) such other matters as are required to be or may be, provided
by rules made under this Act.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and If, before
the expiry of the session which it is so
laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
7. Power to make regulations.-

(1) The State Government may, by regulations,(a) require any such opinion as is referred to in sub-section (2) of
Sec. 3 to be certified by a
registered medical practitioner or practitioners concerned in
such form and at such time as be
specified in such regulations, and the preservation or disposal
of such certificates;
(b) require any registered medical practitioner, who terminates a
pregnancy to give intimation of
such termination and such other information relating to the
termination as maybe specified in
such regulations;
(c) prohibit the disclosure, except to such persons and for such
purposes as may be specified in
such regulations, of intimations given or information furnished
inpursuance of such regulations.
(2) The intimation given an the information furnished inpursuance of
regulations made by virtue of C1.(b)of
Sub-section(1) of shall be given or furnished, as the case may be, to
the Chief Medical Officer of the State..
(3) Any person who wilfully contravenes or wilfully fails to comply with
the requirements of any regulation made
under sub-section (1) shall be liable to be punished with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees.
8. Protection of action taken in good faith.- No suit for other legal proceedings shall
lie against any registered medical practitioner for any damage caused likely to be caused
by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this act.

